Okay, welcome everyone. Today you are here for the workshop on LLMs for Data Analysis in R with
Sarah Altman from Posit. And Sarah, we're so happy to have you here giving this workshop and I will
let you take it from here. Great, yeah, thanks. Happy to be here. I'm going to send some links
in the chat and then I'll share my screen. This is the website for the workshop and then the
repository. You don't need to clone the repo or anything. We'll get set up in a minute, but
just so you have that. And then let me share my slides. Okay. Can you see that, Garrett? Okay, great.
I was going to show this while we were getting ready, but we're going to do all these instructions
in a second, so don't worry about this. We have everything set up for you in an environment, so
you're not going to need to install anything locally or anything. But welcome to LLMs for Data Analysis
in R. Just a little bit about this workshop before we get started. So like Emily said, I'm Sarah. I
work on the AI team at Posit and I'm also joined by Garrett. Garrett, do you want to briefly
introduce yourself? Hi, everyone. I'm Garrett. I work with Sarah at Posit. I'm on the education team.
Yeah. Do you also want to maybe talk about your workshop that's in a month really quickly?
Yes. I believe on June 11th we're scheduling a workshop that's very similar to this topic.
It will be about how to use AI to develop everything from R code to Python code to dashboards
to shiny apps to apps that use AI as a chatbot inside the app and how to deploy those.
So look for that. Yeah. I think at the end we'll talk, maybe overlap a little bit with that
workshop, but I just wanted to mention that in case we get to the end of this workshop and you
wanted to hear more about those topics. Yeah. Check out Garrett's workshop. Okay. I pasted this
in the chat. Maybe Garrett, you could resend that in case anyone joined after that. But this is
where all of the slides and information is going to live. You might want to open this just because
sometimes there's things that you'll need to click and it's going to be easier to click it
from there than to type the links yourselves. And you can follow along with the slides. Sorry.
We're now joined by my cat. And there are set up instructions, but we're going to give you
some time in just a minute to do that. Okay. So workshop format at high level,
we're going to have slides. I'll show some demos where I'm going to run some code and we'll talk
about how it works. And then there will also be interactive exercises in a platform called
instruct where you'll do some coding for these and we've set everything up for you.
You're not going to have to install anything locally or anything like that.
If you have questions, you can put them in the chat at any time, but you're also welcome to
come off mute and ask me. Feel free to ask questions like throughout the workshop
any time. But maybe especially during the exercise portions if you get stuck.
Yeah. Ask questions at any time. Okay. Great. So we're going to start the set up process
just because it takes a few minutes to get going. So you're going to go to this link
and click start. And that's it. It's going to say it's going to take a couple minutes.
And we're going to talk and then come back. So I'm just going to give you a minute
to do that. Again, you just need to click start. It's going to say it's going to take a couple
minutes and then we'll come back. But please let me know if the link isn't working. Great.
So we're going to have like three maybe two main parts of this. The first thing we're going to do
is talk about how to call LLM APIs from R and sort of the basics of how LLMs work.
We're going to take a really brief break and talk about tool calling which is how you give
additional abilities to LLMs. And so this whole that whole section is going to be like how LLMs
work, how to call them from R. Then we're going to talk about making apps with Shiny apps with LLMs
and using coding agents. And then finally we'll talk a little bit about privacy and security.
That part will be pretty short. Okay. So when you look at your environment, which will get set up
in a minute, you're going to see a couple folders. And this is replicated in the repository link
that I shared. You're going to mostly be working in the exercises folder for the your turns.
The main repo also has solutions which are solutions to those exercises. So if
we might not go over the solution for every exercise, but you can always find them in there.
And then you'll also have access to the demos. And these are the code that like
bits of code that I'm going to run and then we'll talk about it.
Okay. So let's get started. So again, I said like first part of this, we're going to talk about
So again, I said like first part of this, we're going to talk about working with LLM APIs from
R. And so generally to use an LLM API, you typically need an API key.
And beyond this workshop, if you want to rerun these exercises or experiment on your own,
you will probably need an API key. There are some providers that you might connect to that
authenticate a different way, which is why I say generally. But if you're doing this on your own
to get an API key, you would sign up for an account with your model provider,
add a payment method if you're doing this on your own, and then they'll give you an API key
and you would store it in your R environment file. This is going to look really similar to like
getting an API key for any API that you might have used in the past,
maybe with the exception that you need to pay for it, pay for the tokens. But you might also have
access to these models through your organization, and maybe they're providing you with API keys. So
Posit provides us with API keys. And then we're able to work with LLMs using those.
But today, we're going to give you API keys to use, you don't have to worry about any of
the setup. I'm just mentioning this, because if you try to run this code on your own,
and you don't have this setup, nothing will work because you don't actually have access to the LLM.
So what's up next? And you're going to use all these keys for all the activities today.
Feel free to like go beyond the exercises if you want, but just don't run like massive amounts of
stuff with them. Please be generally considerate. It is pretty hard to wrap up large charges, but
we want you to explore, but just be considerate. And then we're going to turn them off the end of
the workshop, so you won't be able to use these keys afterwards. Okay, so hopefully,
Instruct should now be ready to open for you. We're going to do this part together. So I'm
going to share that screen instead. And if you just follow along for the setup process.
So at this point, you should have clicked Start, and then open an external window. Sorry, I didn't
replicate that process here for you. And then you should see something like this. So it's the green
Start button. Okay, is everyone, do you see the message? Yeah, sorry about that. I had the wrong
link in one location. You'll just, does anyone have this working?
Or, oh, that's fine. You don't need the project listed. This is because I already started this
earlier. Okay, if you use the new link and weren't able to open it, the estimated time,
two minutes, is good. Yeah, sorry about that. That was the old link. Yeah.
I wonder, could you just open a new tab next to that one and paste in the new link, and then
maybe people will see. Yes.
Let's put the link in the chat. It might not.
I think because it's already going, it's going to reopen that same.
I have to log into and get access to things, but she's,
they're doing it this way, because it's.
Yeah, so eventually you should see this, and then open external window.
I have this because I already set this up. Yours should be blank.
Yeah, so it's, yeah, apologies. You don't need, this does not need to be there. I didn't want
to close it in case it messed something up. But, yeah, I think that's fine.
It sounds like, okay, it sounds like it's generally working. I'm going to give you
some time where we have like a time for you to do an exercise. If it's still not working,
we'll try to troubleshoot individually. If you've reached this page, again, it should be blank,
and click new session. We're going to do everything in RStudio. If you are a Positron
user and you really want to use Positron, it will also work in Positron.
And then we're going to launch RStudio.
Launching. This is the most setup we will have to do this whole time.
Okay. And so now, okay, we'll do this in a second. If everything's successful, you'll see this. And
then the second to last thing we need to do is open the R Medicine LLM exercises folder,
and you should see the exercises. There's one more thing we need to do to get set up.
There's one more thing we need to do to get set up.
And that is add the API keys. So, I'm going to paste a link in the chat, and this is to a
gist on GitHub, and it has API keys. We're going to copy this code and paste it into the R console.
So, it looks like this. I'm going to copy all of this.
And then paste it into the R console, and this is going to set the keys. Okay.
Okay. I'm just going to pause here for a minute. And see if we can, like, group the problems
really quickly. If you have everything working, the next step is to go into the exercises folder,
open the first exercise, and try to run this code. This is just testing if you
have everything set up right. So, when I run it, it doesn't work.
It Sarah, it looks like instruct is really struggling. Like, even as us as admins look
at their dashboard, they're just not loading. So, I'm suspecting we're having trouble with
the third party there. Yeah.
Are you so, you're going to provide API keys, is that right?
Yes. Yes.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. I wonder if there's too many users on the instruct side.
It we have we have a nice group here of 80 people, but that should not tax their system.
Okay. Um, so, I'm going to go ahead and run this code, and I'm just going to run it again.
So, I have a nice group here of 80 people, but that should not tax their system.
Okay. Um, okay. Sorry, everyone. Um, is that something that you can get set up?
And so, I think I'll keep, we'll keep going, and then we'll try to reset things up.
Let me, let me try to create a new instruct invite for everybody. We'll try it one more
time. We'll jump ship to another cloud platform.
Okay. The API key thing, I, this, I literally tested this 30 minutes ago. I'm, I don't think
that is related to inspect, although this is a, this is a fixable issue. Um, yeah. Sorry,
everyone. I know the setup stuff can be frustrating. Okay. I'm going to stop sharing this.
Garrett, while I'm talking, do you mind also messaging Rick from IT and asking about the
keys? I'm wondering if they got the times wrong for their messaging and shut them off.
Thanks. Okay. Sorry about that. Um, we will continue, and hopefully we can get something
working for you. I think someone asked if they have their own keys, uh, and they have,
and they can clone everything locally. That should work for you. Uh, you might have to
install some packages. Yeah. We know about the API key issue. Thank you for putting everything
in the chat. Um, yeah, I, yeah, this, okay. I'm going to, we're going to keep going with
the slides and hopefully we can get something working for you all. Okay. And yeah, again,
my apologies. Each setup has its own, uh, minuses. Okay. Um, but we can keep going and then
we'll try to get you exercises that work. Uh, so first we're going to talk about how conversations
with LLMs work, uh, generally and from R.
So you've probably at this point talked with something like chat GPT or Claude or Gemini
in the browser. And you've seen a conversation that might look something like this, where you
ask it a question or you ask it for a fact, and it responds. You can then keep chatting. It keeps
responding. And depending on how you feel about, you know, the UI and how it works, it might kind
of feel like you're having a conversation. And so we can do the same thing, but from R
by using a package called Elmer. So we're going to take a look at how this code works at a really
high level, and then we'll go into the details. So in Elmer, you set up a chat, which is a
connection to an LLM. And then once you have that connection, this chat object, you can send
requests to the model and it's going to send you a response back. So if we do sort of the same thing,
we ask it to tell us a fact and we run this in R, it's going to give us a response back. The LLM
itself is giving us this response. Um, I did fact check this fact and it is true.
This is not a hallucination. So how does this work? It works because most LLMs are accessible
through HTTP APIs, and this is pretty much just a normal API. If you've ever queried an API to get
data, it's fundamentally the same thing. And we're going to use these APIs to build tools from R that
use LLMs. Okay. So you saw the code at a high level. Let's take a closer look. So the first
step is to load the Elmer package. This is just like loading any other R package.
And then we're going to create a chat object. This is sort of the core Elmer structure that
we're going to use for everything. And this sets up a connection to an API. Here we're setting up
to Anthropx API. And this is what we're going to use to send messages and get responses.
So now we can use the chat method to send a query, passing our message as a string,
and we get a response back.
One of the really nice things about Elmer is that you can easily inspect the chat object to see the
full conversation history. So if we just call chat in the R console, we're going to see all
the messages in the conversation so far, as well as the basics of the conversation. So the tokens
used. We'll talk about tokens in a little bit. But this is basically the basic unit of LLMs.
The cost, which was functionally zero here. And now we see the messages. So the user messages,
which is marked by this user tag, are what I sent. And then the assistant messages are the
responses we get back. And these are being marked like this because messages,
when you're talking to the LLM, have roles.
The roles end up being really important, so we're just going to spend a bit of time on it.
So when you're chatting to the LLM, you as the user are sending messages. And you're not just
sending text. You're sending text with a specific role attached to it. So my message, the user
messages are in blue. These have the user role. The LLM then sends back messages that have the
assistant role in orange. So there's the user role, the assistant role, and then there's one
more role, which is the assistant prompt. This is kind of like the instruction manual for the LLM.
It's where you can tell the model how to behave, what constraints to follow, and that will apply
to the entire conversation. So we have three colors here for three different messages. And
three different roles. So again, there's the assistant prompt role, which is instructions
from you that set the behavior of the assistant. The user role, these are messages from you.
And the assistant role, which are the model's responses to the user. And you always see
which messages have which role and how this is working by looking at those chat objects.
Okay. So we already saw how to send messages and receive them. If you want to set a system
prompt, the chat function from LLM has a system prompt argument. So we can do things that will
guide the entire conversation behavior, like asking it to always answer in haikus. Now when
we ask it questions, it answers in a haiku. And this is going to shape every response the model
gives for that chat instance. And this ends up being pretty powerful because you can insert
quite a bit of control over how the model behaves just with bits of text.
Okay. So now let's take a look at this chat object. We're going to see all three roles.
You have the system role, the user role, and the assistant role. The system prompt to get
is there, shaping the entire conversation behavior. So let's take a look at that.
Okay. So at this point we're moving back into an exercise. So I see you have an update in the chat.
Is there anything to add? Okay. So it sounds like the instruct, the workshop environment
is experiencing service interruptions. So we're going to try the second link again. I'm sorry,
everyone. And we know about the API issue. I have a workaround for that. But let's see.
Yes, there will be everything should be working. Hopefully. I'll click this. Get it started.
Sorry. Do you have access to Rick's chat? He's provided a new API key for us.
Okay. Yeah. I see. Sorry about that.
If you are in an environment like Elizabeth, stay there. You're doing great. And don't mess it up.
Yeah. And we'll get you the new the new key. Yeah. Apparently it's gone. And just
in my defense, IT says it doesn't make any sense.
Okay. Let me I'm just going to open this. And then I will get you the key.
So again, hopefully you can get to this place and then launch RStudio.
And I'm just going to open this. And then I will get you the key.
So, again, hopefully you can get to this place and then launch RStudio.
If you see this,
if you see this,
you're in the right place. We have a folder for our exercises, and you just click that,
we're going to go into that folder. There were some complications with the platform,
and it's not going to work if you create a project, so don't do that. Just click into the folder.
There might have been a way around that. This was the easiest way for now. And if you've gotten
there, just make sure you have all the exercises. I'm going to get you the key in one second.
So we're going to use a different key. The good news is you don't have to do anything to set it
up. The bad news is that open AI won't work, but that's not particularly...
we don't necessarily need that for the workshop. Just know that if you see anything like this,
it's not going to run. During one of the exercise times, I'll try to take a minute
to fix it. Something is going wrong with the new sets of keys. We have another one in here
that should work. So just a known issue that this code will not work. Any anthropic API
code should work with no setup. If you've already done something to paste in new keys or something,
try to go back and make a new session. Okay. Yeah, again, apologies. We had two colliding
problems. Everyone should be able to run the second bit of code. Now, if anyone is still
not able to do that, please let me know. Okay. We will just do the second exercise
together to save a bit of time. So if you have everything working, you can open this O2
conversation.R. Okay. Great. Please let me know if it's not working. Okay. So we have been talking
about creating conversations with Elmer. The point of this exercise is to dig a little deeper into
how this works. And so the first exercise that we're going to do is just fill this in to get
the chat to work. And here we want to make a system prompt so that it answers in as few words
as possible. So, again, that's the system prompt exercise or argument. And run this.
And now when we call the chat method on that chat object to send a request to the LLM,
we should get a response back that obeys that system prompt. So
the little zoom icon that's blocking this. But it's telling us that there's an Elmer function
called models anthropic which tells us which models are available. This is a helpful function.
We'll use this in a little bit as well. And it is answering in as few words as possible.
Ordinarily, Claude Opus is pretty verbose. Okay. Yes, I can increase the font size.
Okay. So now what happens if we ask a follow-up question? Like, what about open AI models?
And notice that it is giving us a succinct answer. One word answer. One function answer.
And it knows what we're talking about. So, before we asked what Elmer function tells me what models
are available, it gave us an answer saying what about open AI models and it's giving us a really
short answer. So, it is taking the context from the entire conversation to form this answer.
If we make a new chat. So, let's say we make a fresh chat. This does not have the history of
this one. You can take a look at it. There's no conversation history. If we use that to ask what
about open AI models, it's not going to have any idea what we're talking about. It thinks this is
the start of the conversation because we made a new chat object. So, we're going to ask what
chat object. So, then the question is how do the answers to three and four
differ? Again, if we make a new chat object, it doesn't have the context from the previous one.
It doesn't know what we're talking about when we ask follow-up questions. And if we don't put
a system prompt, it's going to answer very verbosely. I realize that was sort of a demo,
but I'm going to do a more formal demo now and we're going to take a look at something called
ClearBot. Okay. So, this is an app that I have running. And the point of this app is to just
show us a little bit more about the internals of the APIs and give us a clue about how they're
working. I'm just going to switch this model. Okay. So, before we asked it a question about
an Elmer function. So, I'm going to ask it the same question.
What Elmer function can tell me what models are available? Okay. There's something going on with
the APIs. Okay. The APIs are down. Okay. We're going to move on from that and I'll come
back and see. I think this is using the same key. Yes.
Okay. I was trying to figure out what's going on in a little bit. This was just running
literally five minutes before the workshop started. I will try to explain in words the
takeaways. We already saw these a little bit in the conversation. But when you send a request to
the LLM, you have to send the entire conversation history each time. I'll try to do this in the
slides. The demo is very helpful for seeing this. But basically, when you have a conversation with
an LLM, each time you send a request, it sends the entire conversation history to the LLM. So,
it does not have a memory of your conversation before. You have to send the entire conversation
each time. And this is because LLMs are stateless. They do not remember or have a state
where they store your conversation for you. So, you have to send the entire thing each time.
It's kind of like it has amnesia. It forgets everything after each response. Each request
is completely independent. And then it's going to construct the conversation from what you send.
So, it's not really like you're talking to a person where the person remembers what you said
before and then generates a response. It would be like if you had to tell the person the entire
history of the conversation each time you wanted to tell them something new.
We've talked a bit about how conversations work with LLMs, statelessness, and sending
this full history. So, we're going to talk really briefly at a high level about how they actually
work, how they understand what you're saying, and how they construct responses.
So, LLMs, you might know, are trained on this huge corporate data, essentially everything that's
been written on the internet, books they have access to, all of this text and information.
They extract the patterns from that and through that develop the ability to simulate,
understand a context, generating text that matches your request. And they kind of understand how
language works. So, they can do things like answer your questions, write code, and translate.
But LLMs don't generate whole sentences at once, and they also don't generate necessarily
whole words at once. Instead, they work token by token. So, they think in tokens, which are these
fundamental units of LLMs. You can kind of think of a token like a word, but it is not necessarily
a word. So, for example, hello is one token, but the word unconventional, which is a bit longer,
the word unconventional, which is a bit longer, is split into three tokens.
And it's important to know about tokens because this defines their input and output limits
for individual requests, as well as API pricing, which is usually broken down by millions of
tokens. And tokens are just for words. So, images can also be tokenized as well.
I have another demo, but I'm hesitant to try it since none of my keys seem to be working.
I'm going to let's just take one or two minutes. I'm going to try to fix this,
and we'll try to make sure everyone has things working. If you still don't have it working,
can you put it in the chat or unmute? I know people have said this above in the chat,
but if it's still not working, can you write something? I'm just going to take one minute
to try and see if I can get a working key.
So, this is an app that helps us understand how token generation works. So, we'll keep this
prompt here to rate a limerick. It's going to generate the response, and then
this is showing us both how the text is broken into tokens. So, you see they kind of map to words,
but some things are split up. And if we click on each of these, we can see the token probabilities.
This demo is in your directory. This should work, hopefully, if you run it.
Hopefully, if you run it. So, if we click on each one, we can see that it chose their token,
because it has the highest probability, but there was other options with different probabilities.
And then to follow there, once has the highest probability, and then cat, or sorry, was,
and eventually cat. And this is just helpful. This just gives us a basic understanding of
how these tokens are generated. It's choosing the next token with the highest probability,
at sort of a high level. Okay. Any questions about this, or about tokens?
Yes. The OpenAI API key issue is a known problem. Any code that we'll have, I'll walk you through,
that has OpenAI API, it's not going to work at this moment, because our keys aren't working,
but you do have a working Anthropic key. So, if you have a working Anthropic key,
it's not going to work at this moment, because our keys aren't working,
but you do have a working Anthropic key. You will have access to the scripts after the workshop.
Everything is in that repository that we sent at the beginning. I will send the link out again
afterwards. When you have a longer exercise, I will also try to address the key issue. Okay.
So, it's okay if you can't run the demos. That one might have been using
OpenAI, which won't work in that current environment. Okay. So, we talked about,
at a high level, how LLMs work, how they generate tokens, that they are stateless.
And I just want to talk really briefly about how to think about working with LLMs.
And in general, I think the best approach is to think about them empirically instead of
theoretically. You really don't need to understand their internals or the details
of how they work. I think it's mostly okay to treat them as black boxes. And instead of, you
know, theorizing, if it can do something, just try it out and experiment. I think you might find
that there are things that you think they almost certainly could not do that they clearly can do
today. And then there's things that you think surely they can do, and it turns out they're
terrible at. And this is partially because you might think that the plot of model performance
and task difficulty looks something like this, where really easy tasks, models are great at,
really hard tasks, they're really bad at. But it doesn't really work like that. Instead, LLMs are
very jagged. They have very jagged performance. So, there's some easy tasks they're great at,
there's easy tasks they're terrible at, and there's hard tasks that they're good at,
hard tasks that they're bad at. So, for example, I think like coding, some coding tasks are very
hard. LLMs are generally great at writing code. However, if you give it a vector, an R, and ask
it to count the number of elements above a certain number, they're actually very bad at this,
and will not give you an accurate count of the elements in a vector, which you might think is a
very easy task. Their ability is very jagged. And so, because of that, I think in general,
just embrace the experimental process with LLMs. We will talk about a way to formally run experiments
for LLMs in the next section. But in general, just try things out, explore, try and reason about
their behavior from observing it, instead of thinking through, okay, I know this is how
transformers work, so this is going to happen. Okay. But we're going to just transition really
quickly to one other point, which is that we saw how to use the chat method to send one request
and get one response back. If you want to keep chatting back and forth, Elmer also has built in
functions for that. You would either start an ongoing back and forth chat in the console
with live console, or in the browser with live browser. Okay. We're going to skip this demo for
now, because this isn't particularly important to the rest of the workshop. Okay.
Yeah. Ideally, you should be able to run the demos, but if you don't have the right keys,
it's not going to work. But yeah, thanks for that message. It's not critical to
the workshop. Sorry. One second. I had to open. Too many things. Okay.
So, now we're going to talk about programming with LLMs. So far, we've really just done
basic chat, and there's lots more that you can do. So, you learned how to use Elmer.
The next step is really thinking about which model and provider you want to use. There are
a lot of providers and many models to choose from. First, I just want to clarify the provider
is going to be the company that hosts and serves your model. So, this is something like Anthropic
or OpenAI. If you're using something like Hugging Face, that might be your provider.
This is the company that hosts and serves the models. And then a model is a specific LLM
with particular capabilities. And models can vary across several dimensions. One is
the amount of content you can give them. So, how many tokens can you give the model in a single
request? This might range from like 200,000 to 1 million tokens, which is actually generally quite
a lot. Speed. So, this is how many tokens per second they can generate and intake.
Cost. How much does it cost to use the model? At this point, it's usually about like $1 to $5
per million input tokens for the major frontier models, maybe less than one for smaller models.
And input tokens are usually priced less than output tokens. Those are the tokens the model
is sending back to you. There's intelligence. How smart or how good is the model at tasks you want
to use it for? And then additional capabilities. So, many models can also do things like that.
They have vision capabilities. They can do reasoning, extended reasoning or thinking.
They have tools, all that. And we'll talk about tools in a bit.
I find the naming conventions really confusing. So, we just go through that really quickly. There
are many models. If you pay attention to like news at all about LLMs, there's like new models
coming out all the time, and the naming conventions can be opaque. So, the Anthropic
models, which is what we're going to be using today, have three. So, Anthropic has Claude
models, the three model families. It took me a really long time to realize that they are named
after types of poetry. So, Haiku is a small poem. The Haiku model is the smallest, fastest,
and cheapest model line. Sana is a larger model or larger poem. So, it's the sort of larger,
more expensive. And then Opus is a very long poem. So, this is the largest, most expensive,
most intelligent model. And then the number that you might see after this, like Opus 7,
that is the version. So, a higher number means a more recent version.
For OpenAI, they have GPT models. The GPT with no suffix or GPT Pro is the most expensive,
smartest, slowest model, and then you have Mini and Nano.
There are also local or open weights models. So, these might be things that you personally
could download and run locally on your computer, or maybe your organization has a server that it
runs these models on for you. I think these naming schemes can be even more confusing.
I'll just go over this really quickly. So, for example, Quen 3.6 and Jemma 4 are two
recent local models. And these, I just took a picture of the various options you have
for each of these models, which I find opaque and confusing. Generally, how these are named
is you have the model name. It's like Quen 3.6. The number of parameters, for example,
would be like 35B. That means there's 35 billion parameters. This is the model size, how big the
model is. And then you might have an additional suffix with an A that's the number of activated
parameters. This is like the number of parameters that are actually in use anytime you send a query.
So, for example, Jemma 4.31B has 31 billion parameters. If it has that A3B at the end,
that means there's 3 billion active parameters. This isn't necessary for today, so to speak, but
I think it can be confusing and sort of be a barrier to using the models.
And so, I find it helpful to understand their names.
Okay. People often want to know what model to use, and I think it can really vary on your needs,
your organization's needs, and what models you have access to. Generally, we recommend
picking a recent frontier model from one of the big labs because they tend to be
best performing models and then move to a cheaper one if you need.
But you don't always have your pick of model. Your organization might constrain you to only
a particular provider or only local models. So, it really can depend on where you work,
what kind of data you use, and what you have access to.
Okay. So, let's take a look at how to actually use different providers and models in Elmer. So,
Elmer supports all of the major providers plus local models and enterprise options.
And you can access models from these various providers by using
the chat function that corresponds to the provider.
So, we have the major paid providers, open weights, models, and enterprise options like AWS
Bedrock. You might have noticed that earlier we were using just a function called chat.
instead of these chat underscore functions. And you can do that too. You can use either one.
So, LLM has a shortcut where you just call chat and then pass the provider name as a string.
If you just pass the provider name, it's going to pick a reasonable model for you to use. It
has a default built-in. Same thing for OpenAI. If you want to specify a particular model
with the chat function, use the format provider slash model name. So, again, you can use either
chat or the chat underscore functions. It's really the same thing. In the exercises today,
we tend to use chat just because it's easier to swap things out with that.
Okay. So, now you're going to open up the third exercise
and use LLM to list the available models from Anthropic and OpenAI. This OpenAI-related
function should work because it does not rely on the API. Pretty sure. And at this time,
I'm going to look into this, but you should only be able to use Anthropic models. You only have an
Anthropic API key. So, just send the same prompt to different Anthropic models and compare the
responses and feel free to play around with the prompt. The point of this is just to get you used
to swapping out the models with Elmer and get a feel for the different flavors of model.
Okay. I'm going to give you four minutes for this, and I'm going to quickly try to look into
the key issue. Okay. I see a message that the, yeah, your Anthropic key is now not working. I just
something weird is going on. I just ran the code. I ran the code once. It worked. I just
ran it again. It did not work. I restarted my R session, and it worked, but I hadn't reset the
key. And it seems like it's working for some people and not others. If it doesn't work,
try restarting your R session. I don't really understand why that would do anything,
but you could try it. And do, yeah, do not use those, the keys that we have put in that
those are not working. If you have pasted those in, restart your R session. And again, yeah,
something odd is going on. But it sounds like it's working for some people.
Okay. Okay. So, we're going to move on. Feel free to keep putting it in the chat if you have
issues. We want to get this working for everyone. Earlier I mentioned that if you want to formally
experiment, mention a way to do that. So, there's a package called vitals. This is an R package
that lets you run LLM evaluations, sort of like little experiments from R. So, you might do this
if you want to evaluate if a model does a particular task well or not, or to compare models
to each other so you can pick the best one for your use case, or maybe to compare how you've
written a prompt. So, here's some plots from an eval I ran to test model performance on R code
generation. So, again, you can compare across models, you can compare cost versus how well
they do on the task and use that to pick the best model for your use case. Okay.
So, far we've just been sending text back and forth to the LLM, but you can also
send other types of information. This is called multimodal input.
So, images get tokenized just like text. For an LLM, a picture is roughly 227 words
or maybe 170 tokens. And so, in LLMER, we pass other types of input with content underscore
functions. So, for images, we use content image file. This passes an image from your local file
system to the chat. You can also do the same thing if you have an image at a particular URL
with content image URL. Or if you have a PDF, you want to extract information from that PDF
using an LLM, transform it into something else, you can use content PDF file to pass a PDF from
your file system. Okay. So, now we're going to talk about structured output. And this is how
you can get LLMs to return data in a particular structured format instead of free text,
which is really useful if you are doing, you know, any kind of data analysis.
So, here's a common problem. You might have some messy text data and you need to extract
specific fields like name and age. You can definitely do this by writing R code. It might
involve a complex regular expression, a lot of string parsing, but you can do it. And it might
look something like this. And it works. But we have to write a lot of code. And this is actually
something that LLMs are really good at, generally. And it's, like, easy to use for this use case.
And we can just ask it to extract the name and age. And it can reason flexibly about what those
values are. So, we don't have to write those complicated regular expressions.
So, here we've just set up a basic chat. This is in prompt to extract the name and age.
And now when we ask it to extract that from two of those elements in the vector,
those free text elements, it gives us back a name and age. So, this is great. But this is still just
free text. It would probably be better if we could get it into some kind of R object,
like a list or a data frame. So, something like this, where you have a list with the name and the
age, like an object that we're used to working with in R. And you can pretty easily do this
with Elmer with the chat structured function or method. So, this returns a piece of structured
data instead of just free text. The trick is that we first have to tell it what structure we want.
So, to do so, we use these type functions to define a structure with its types. So, here we
use type object to make a list. This is going to specify that we need a list. And then name should
be a string and age should be an integer. There are type functions for all the types.
Now, we can give chat structured, again, that bit of free text, our type specification.
And it'll give us the data back in the format that we requested. And this is now ready for
use in your analysis. If we wanted to do it over all of those free text entries,
we could. And then we would have data that would be ready to use.
So, notice that we did type string for name. And so, name is a string. And type integer for age.
And so, age comes back as an integer. And we're going to see these type functions again later.
There's, and again, yeah, there's one for every type. If you want to see all of them, you can just
do, you know, Elmer colon colon type underscore and see all of the type functions there are to
choose from. You can also add descriptions to help an LLM understand what each field means.
Didn't do that there. Like this. So, if you have, if you, name is somewhat self-explanatory. But if
you wanted, you could give it more context about what that value should be to help it extract the
right data. Okay. So, now you're going to try this out yourself. So, in the 04 folder, there's some
notes. This is just the wrong file path. You're going to extract data from those notes using the
method we just saw. And I've given you scaffolding for the expected structure. You just need to fill
it in with those type functions and then write a little bit more code. Okay. And I think this
exercise already has, make sure it already, yes, it already has an anthropic model there. So, it
should work. Just don't change it to OpenAI. Okay. So, I'm going to give you seven minutes
to work on that and then we'll go over the exercise. Okay. I think we have solved, I think I
solved the key mystery. But I think it probably just makes sense to keep
using the built-in anthropic key and just not worry about the other keys for now.
Okay. If, did anyone have particular questions about this exercise or
difficulties? Otherwise, I think we'll move on. I'm not going to go over it. But let me know if
you have, if you ran into problems. The question about recommending checks to extract the corrected
data, I think in general, like the model seeing information where there is none is a problem.
And can be sort of difficult to get around if it really thinks there's going to be
information when it is in fact not there. But I think you could try to fix it with better
prompting. Or you might have like, you know, some kind of deterministic check either before it gets
to the model or after. Like you might have if you're writing a general normal R function,
even if there is no LLM. But I would say in general we sometimes run into problems where
if information does not match the model's expectation or information isn't there and
it thinks it's going to, that can be a problem for LLMs. Okay. Cool. Okay.
So, it's about an hour and a half. We're just going to take a three minute break before we
get to the next section in case you want to stand. Yeah, it's almost been an hour and a half. Stand
up or get some water or anything. I'll be answering questions in the chat, though. Or
you're welcome to come off mute and ask questions during this time. We'll come back at 1253.
I've been answering some of the questions in the chat. For the question about the subscript
out of bounds, I think you would need to see all of your code. If you're still running into that,
feel free to paste all of it as a reply. Okay.
So, I think we've hopefully now resolved all setup issues.
And can just hopefully things will be smooth from here on out.
As I said that, I just got an error from inspect. Okay. I think it's working, though. Great.
Sorry. Okay. So, next we're going to talk about prompt writing or prompt engineering.
So, prompt writing is a large part of working with LLMs because many times the work of getting
LLMs to do what you want them to do is figuring out how to give them the context they need
in order to be useful. And so, one of those bits of context that you can give them
is written information in the form of prompts. We already did this a little bit. So, we're just
going to talk about it in a little bit more detail. Okay. Just as a reminder, you can use
the system prompt argument to pass system prompts to the chat object in Elmer. So, here we just put
some prompt in a string and then we pass it to the system prompt argument of chat.
And usually you'll want to actually put your prompt in an external file, probably a markdown
file, and then read it in and pass that to the system prompt instead of putting everything
as a string and storing it in an object. Okay. So, in the fifth exercise, there are some
note files stored in an object and your job is to edit the prompt MD file to instruct the model
to organize the notes in a certain way each time. You can make up a format that you want, but it
might be something like, you know, always with the date at the top, have a summary sentence at the
top, put everything in bullets, something like that. So, play around with the prompt in order
to get it to organize the notes in the way that you want and run all of the notes through the
system prompt. Okay. I'll open this up. I don't know what that is. Just so you can see. Try restarting.
Did it work, Sarah?
I looked away. Did my R session? Okay. I think it worked. I think I just restarted R and it
it worked. So, this is the sorry. Maybe not. Okay. So, I've seen this before. That means that
you got disconnected from instruct, but to get reconnected, you have to go to the screen where
it said open external window. Okay. Maybe try refreshing that, though. Yeah. Thanks.
I'll just I'll try reopening
from the link.
Sorry. Do you mind resending the new new instruct link?
Not at all. Let me just find it.
All right. Just send it to you.
Everyone else, I'm monitoring the stats for instruct, but we really have no control over it,
but it says their performance is yellow out of green, yellow, red.
Okay.
Is it normal to need to confirm my email?
That's the first time I've seen that. Okay.
Shut up.
Trailing.
Working for you. I just sent you another link that I think will work for you. Thanks.
Thank you.
You'll have to manually clone in the git repo.
Yeah, I also have, I have everything locally too, so I can, I can do that.
Okay.
Great.
Did anyone have any particular problems with the prompting?
I think I have an environment that's working. Will this have keys built in?
Yes, but now that I think about it, they're through Amazon Bedrock, so you might want to
paste in an API key. I'll work on that when we do the next exercise, as long as no one had
particular questions about getting this going. Okay. So,
in general, if you're trying to get an LLM to do what you want it to do,
sometimes it's just not possible to get it to fully do what you want it to do. But to start,
you might ask yourself three questions, which is, one, do you use the best model or the best model
for your use case? And if not, try using a better or more recent model, because they really can
vary a lot. In the prompt, did you really clearly explain what you want the model to do?
And into this process,
is very similar in many ways to explaining how to do something to another person or documenting a process.
And so you can kind of evaluate if you clearly explained,
in much the same way as you would evaluate
if you clearly explained to another person.
And then the third question is,
did you provide examples of what you want?
Generally, it's very helpful to add examples
into the system prompt.
Okay, if you've done those three things
and it is still not doing what you want,
you might need to look into something else
or it might not be really possible
to get it to perform as you want it to do.
Okay, but these, if you answer these three questions,
you've done these three things,
that can really help a lot
and take care of a lot of the sort of model misbehaving
that people often see.
Okay, and you might ask, like, what you should put in the system prompt versus
the user prompt, meaning, like, the prompt that you're sending to the model, you
know, each time you send a request. And the short answer is that if you have any
instructions or background knowledge, put that in the system prompt. This is going
to be something that guides the entire conversation, and so you want to put that
in the system prompt. You don't have to send it each time. Okay, a couple other
tips. You can use LLMs to help you draft or improve your prompts. Cloud is a prompt
generator. This can generally be helpful if you're new to prompt writing. Structure
is also really helpful. Again, this is not that different from, you know, writing a
set of instructions for another person. So you can use markdown headings or XML tags
to give structure to your prompts. You can also use variables to insert dynamic
content into your prompt. So, for example, like, if you have content in another file
where that file is changing or you want to conditionally read something, you can use
variables. You do need to be aware of something called prompt injection, which is
where you could insert malicious information into a prompt, get the LLM to do stuff you
don't want. In general, you want to make sure you're doing this with files that you
trust and have, you know, verified do not have anything malicious in them. And you often
generally need to be aware of what files your LLM has access to. Okay. A couple other tips.
Like I said, generally you want to get prompts out of your code and into separate files.
This is easier for you to read. It's easier to read diffs if you're using version control.
It's easier to organize. It might not make that much difference with the LLM, but it's
going to make a difference for you as the person and anyone you're collaborating with.
It can also be really helpful to force the model to say things out loud.
We're going to talk about tool calling in a bit, but you might only want it to do three
rounds of that. And if you force it to say that out loud to itself or to add it in a memo to
itself, it's sort of like its internal monologue, it can help it actually obey the rules that you're
telling it to obey. On the Elmer website, there's a vignette about prompt design.
And this is really helpful if you're thinking about running prompt. So, I encourage you to
take a look at that. Okay.
Okay. Any questions about prompt writing?
Cool. So, now we're going to talk about tool calling.
And we just saw how to add knowledge with prompting. And so, now we're going to talk
about how to add abilities with tools. And this is another way to make LLMs useful for you.
So, prompting is generally for adding knowledge. Tools are for adding abilities that LLMs don't
have out of the box. So, before we talk about tool calling, we're going to take a look at how LLMs
actually work and clarify what they actually can and can't do because it can be a little confusing.
So, on their own, do you think LLMs can access the internet, run code, or send an email?
We can try it out. Here's a chat where we're just asking Claude Haiku what the weather is like.
I think the implication is that right now in San Francisco.
And we're going to get a response where it basically says, I don't have access to that,
and I can't tell you. And that's because LLMs don't actually have access to real time data.
They don't have a built in internet connection. They were trained up until a particular
date, and that is the boundary of their knowledge. And anything past that, they don't know about.
And what about doing something to affect the world, like writing a file to your computer?
So, what if we ask it to write a data frame to a CSV file? Again, it's going to say, I can't
really do that. Because LLMs can't affect the world. They can't change your environment or
any environment. And at this point, you might be thinking, like, this can't possibly be true.
I know that these things can do it. I'm told they can do everything for me. And you're saying they
can't even tell me the current weather. And the distinction is that on their own, LLMs cannot do
this. But they can if you give them the right tools. So, we're going to see how to do that
with Elmer. A tool is essentially a function and metadata. And if you've ever written in
R function and then documented it, this is basically the same thing. If you've written
in R function and written documentation, you can write a tool. It's basically the same process,
just with an LLM as the intended audience instead of another person.
Okay. So, we can use tools to do things like bring real time or up-to-date information to the model
or let the model interact with the world.
So, we're going to see how to implement tools in R with Elmer.
I'm going to go over this at a high level, and then we'll take a closer look at the specifics
of how to do this. So, the first step is just to write or find an R function that
carries out your desired functionality.
So, let's say we want to make a tool so that the LLM can access information about the current
weather. We can write a function get weather. We would have some code in there that returns
the weather for latitude and longitude. And then the second step is to document that function
for the LLM. In Elmer, you do this with the tool function, and we pass it the name of the
function. And again, like documentation, this is you're annotating the function for the model.
We're giving it a description, and we'll give it the arguments. I'm going to show you the exact
code in a bit. This is just at a high level what's happening. You write a function, you document it
for the LLM. And then the third step is to register the tool. This tells your chat object
about the tool so the LLM knows it exists and can request to use it when it thinks it is required.
Okay. So, let's take a look in a little bit more detail. So, again, the first step is to create
So, let's take a look in a little bit more detail. So, again, the first step
is to create a function that does our desired functionality.
This function is a little silly because we're just wrapping an existing function,
but I wanted to show you how this would work. So, we're going to use the weather package
to get a forecast for a lat and long. Then we annotate it with the Elmer function tool.
So, we pass it the function, a description, just what it does, and the arguments. You might
recognize these type functions from when we talked about structured output. These are the same
functions. We're giving a type for each argument so the LLM knows exactly what to do when it requests
that the tool be run. Okay. And then, finally, we register it. And, again, this is telling the
model that the tool exists and it's available for use. This is just that simplified a little bit.
Like I said, that code was a little bit weird because we wrapped an existing function.
If you want to use a function that already exists, you don't have to do that. You can just
do what I did here and do an inline anonymous function,
but you don't need to worry about this if that sounds complicated. But let's try it. So, I've
registered the tool. The chat object knows about it. Now when we ask what the weather is like right
now, it is going to actually give us a useful response. So, let's go through this. Notice that
it has this tool call at the start. So, we know that it did a tool call. It called get weather
with a lat and long. The weather API returned weather information to the LLM. And then the
model was able to incorporate that information into its response. So, we just gave the model
a new ability. And again, we're reusing these type functions that we saw earlier to specify
the type for each argument. And these functions specify object types in a way that it's easy
for the LLM to understand, which is why we keep using these and they're in Elmer.
And so, you just choose the type for your argument. And there are type functions for
all of the types. And you can see the full list on the Elmer website.
Okay. So, we saw how this works in R. But let's talk a little bit about how it actually works.
So, again, as we keep seeing, you have a conversation. You send a message as the user
to the LLM. And let's say we're, again, asking about the weather. This is not very interesting,
but it is a good example. And let's say that the LLM has access to our weather tool already.
It knows that it does not have access to realtime weather data. And it knows it has access to the
tool. So, it is going to choose to request that it be called. So, it decides to use the weather
tool. And it specifies the code to run. We'll talk about this more. But one of the, like,
main things to know about tool calling is that the LLM itself is not running the code.
When we register a tool with Elmer and chat and the LLM calls it, that's running in your own R
session. The tool, like, it's essentially like you ran it, you know, in your console or something.
But the LLM has requested that it be run. The code doesn't run, you know, in the cloud or on
anthropic servers or something. Okay. So, the LLM specifies which code to run.
So, it's saying it gives a particular latitude and longitude that it knows from its knowledge base.
Elmer takes that tool call request, actually executes it in your R session,
querying the weather API. The weather API sends back some data. That goes to the LLM.
And then it's able to incorporate that in its response. Again, Elmer is taking care of all of
this communication for you. So, you don't really even see that this happens because it's handling
it all under the hood. Okay. So, again, the LLM cannot run code by itself. It just requests that
tools be run. If when for these exercises, the code is being the tool code is being run in your
session in the instruct environment, it's not being run in the LLM itself because they can't run code.
And instead, the LLM has control over two things. When the tool is called. So, it has the ability
to understand, you know, the user is asking for the weather. I'm going to use the weather tool
and pick between tools if it has the option. So, it controls when the tool is called as well as
how the tool is called. And this mainly means which arguments it's passing in.
And so, this is really sort of like the power behind tool calling is that it can do those two
things pretty well. So, again, the LLM is choosing these arguments. I didn't tell it the latitude and
longitude for San Francisco. It has that knowledge already and it's able to pass it in. If our
function had more arguments, like a time, it would also be able to use its knowledge and knowledge
of what the user is requesting to pick the right arguments. Okay. If you already have a function
and it is documented, so this might be, you know, a function from a package or built in
or one that you've created and documented yourself, you can use the Elmer helper function
create tool def which will spit out this tool definition for you so you don't have to type all
of that. And even if it's just a starting point, this can be really helpful. Okay.
So, now you're going to try tool calling yourself. So, there's some health expenditure data
in your folder. So, your job is to write a get country spending function that takes a
country name and a year and returns health spending by purpose. There's some code started
already for you in there. And then you're going to wrap it as a tool and register it like we saw
and then try it out by asking the model about spending for a specific country.
Okay. I'll try to get my environment set up. Yeah. Apologize again for the instruct
issues. Thank you all for bearing with us. I know it's frustrating.
If anyone's logging back into instruct and they get a request for email verification,
if you can take a screenshot of that and put it into the chat, I could take that. That'd be useful
for me. That's a new behavior. To be honest, it sounds like instruct is dealing with some sort of
attack. I'd like to take that. Yeah, thanks. I feel like we're stress testing instruct or
something. Okay. Great. Yeah, it's not working for me. It's not working for me.
I can run all the code locally, but it'll take me a minute to get this
set up. It didn't work when I entered the code and also the workbench
instances. Or it's working, but I would have to reinstall the packages.
So, what we'll do is, for those of you who were able to run the code,
do you have, does anyone have any questions or get stuck? I realize that this is mostly,
you know, you trying to get instruct to work. But we can, I'm going to keep going
here, and then if we get an environment that is set up and working for me, at least,
I can go back and talk about some of the exercises and show the remaining demo. Cool.
Okay. So, these are questions to ask yourself if you were able to get this code to work.
I realize that not all of you did. But
so, we can still talk about these sort of abstractly. So, the point of this exercise
was to write a tool where the model can specify a year and a country. It gets back a bit of data,
and then it's able to incorporate that data into its response. And so, the first question
is, does the model have access to the underlying data? And no, it does see the result of the tool
call, but it doesn't actually have access to that underlying data frame. Instead, what it's doing
is just passing in a country name and a year and then getting a result back. And again,
the model is just controlling when to use the tool and what arguments to pass to the function.
And then, I think there is actually a lot that we could do to make this setup better. This is sort
of a minimal tool setup. One thing you might do is give the model access to the list of country
and years available so it doesn't have to guess and think through how this function could fail
and do some just sort of normal function writing to throw errors if that happens.
And error messages, just like they're helpful for people, can also be helpful for the algorithm.
It is going to see that response. If it requests a tool be run and it gets an error,
it's going to see the error message. So, again, a lot of this with tool writing and prompt writing,
there is a lot of overlap for doing these things for people and documenting things well,
writing code that is easy to use, error messages that make sense, all of that. Those are
transferable skills when working with LLMs. Okay. If you want to give your chat the ability to
search the web, Elmer does have built-in web search tools so you don't need to write these
from scratch. This is just sort of for your awareness. You can use these built-in web search
tools. This is the Cloud one but there's ones for the other providers as well. Okay.
Great. I'm just monitoring the chat. Okay. So, we have
three sections left. So, up to this point, we've been mostly talking about how to use Elmer to
access and program with LLM APIs from R. We're going to shift gears a little bit
and first talk about query chat, which is a way to build shiny apps for your data where you can
use natural language to query your data and update your app. Then we'll talk about coding agents and
then finally we'll talk a little bit about privacy and security with LLMs.
So, what is query chat? So, query chat is another Posit package. It lets you explore tabular data
in a shiny app using natural language, meaning you can just chat to ask questions about your
data or update the app. So, instead of writing your own SQL or D player code, you're just asking
questions about the data in plain English. I just want to say for this part, you really don't need
to know shiny at all. If you're going to make your own query chat app and customize things,
you probably need to know a bit about shiny. But for this section, you really don't. We want to
show you query chat because we think it is really useful and also a good example of how to make
something that uses an LLM that is constrained, takes advantage of what LLMs are, and takes
advantage of what LLMs are good at. So, you really just need to know that shiny is packaged for
making web apps in R. Again, query chat, we're going to explore the data with natural language
built on top of LLM and shiny and it works with data frames or a database connection if you have
it. This is kind of abstract. It's going to be easier to take a look. So, I have, I think someone
mentioned this works for them when they ran it. This should work for you to run it yourself if
you have instruct working. But this is an example query chat dashboard. So, I'm going to point out
a couple things. So, we have a chat in the sidebar here. And this kind of looks like a
normal shiny app. We have some value boxes, plots, a map. And then here it's showing us some SQL
code. So, if you don't know SQL, this is basically saying take all the columns, everything from the
table Airbnb data. What query chat is nice for is that you can ask questions about the data in the
chat or request that the dashboard be updated to only show a subset of the data.
So let's do that second one first.
And save only this, again this is Airbnb data, show only superhost listings with more than 100 reviews.
Okay.
And first, you pay attention to that the app itself updated. So based on what I said here,
it's now only showing superhost listings with more than 100 reviews.
The nice thing is that it shows you the exact SQL that it wrote here and up here.
And if we want to see what underlying data was created, we can click table.
Okay.
So we can do things like that where it's going to filter the data for us and then update
everything in the app.
But we can also ask questions generally about our data. So I think if we ask it this, it is not
going to update the app, but run a query, get a result, and then give us the answer right in the
chat here. Yeah, so I guess
yeah, so I guess
elegant and edgy loft has the highest occupancy rate.
Okay.
Great. So this is really cool. We'll talk a little bit about how it works. So the,
again, you can ask a question in natural language, and then the LLM is writing a SQL query. We just
have been talking about how tool calling works. And so this is a tool it has access to. And again,
it's going to specify what SQL to write, but it's not actually running the code itself. It's in a
tool, it requests that tool be run, the tool is run, it gives it back the results. And so because
the setup, the LLM is never touching your raw data directly.
Yeah, so again, the LLM isn't executing the query, the database is executing the query,
but the LLM is saying which SQL to write based on your question.
And then it's giving you back the real filtered data.
And this sort of constrained approach has a variety of benefits.
Um, the first is that the database is running the query, and not the LLM or like the LLM running it
somewhere else, which means that the numbers are not hallucinated, it's just SQL that's being run,
and then the result is being brought back into the chat or into the underlying data.
It's safe, this is query chat is limited to read only query, so it is not going to delete the
tables in your database. It's reproducible, you saw that the SQL, you can see the SQL,
this can be exported, it can be rerun. And I think these, like if you can make something with
an LLM that has these three benefits, that's like you made a great thing with an LLM basically,
because all of these three things can often be difficult to get. LLMs are non-deterministic,
they can do unsafe things if unlimited, and often the things that they do are non-reproducible,
again, because they're, you know, non-deterministic, or they aren't running
code to get the answers or something like that. Okay. So I'm going to show you how to make a
really simple query chat app. This is basically the simplest version that you can make. It's just
one function from the query chat package, which is query chat app, and then you pass it your
data frame. So again, query chat is built on Shiny, but you don't really need to know Shiny
to run this code and get a sense of what query chat can do. So you'll run this in just a second.
Okay. And before you take a look at it yourself, let's just take a closer look at how it works
under the hood. So again, the LLM, I guess even before this diagram starts, you ask the LLM a
question, it takes in that question, and based on what you're saying, devises a SQL query to either
answer your question or change the data in a way that will help you answer it, sends that SQL query
to the database, database executes the query, and then that updates the underlying data in the app,
which is why the tables and the plots and those value boxes all change. If you are familiar with
Shiny, what it's doing is updating reactives, and so when it filters it, the data is updated,
all of the UI in the app is updated.
Okay. It turns out this is really powerful, and you can do all sorts of things with this format.
Okay. So now hopefully it's your turn. You're going to open the seventh exercise and just
fill in that query chat app call. There's not much code to write. Again, this is a really simple
function call. It's going to make a really basic query chat app, and instead your job is to just
run it and explore the data with natural language and just get a feel for how
query chat works, and here's some example questions.
I'm going to make sure this is going to work for you all, too.
The documentation says it defaults to open AI, so if you don't have a chat object in there, so,
but maybe it sees the key. Okay. I do have a local setup working,
so I'll just share that quickly in case you weren't able to do this yourself.
Okay. So this, I think all you need to do is fill in the health expectancy data here,
and if you, let's take a look at the
documentation. What I was trying to figure out earlier is if you don't specify a client,
which is like the chat itself, what it's going to default to, because if it was going to default
to open AI, it wasn't going to work for you, because you'll notice here we didn't specify
chat anywhere, and I think what is happening is you can pass in a chat object, but it is,
or it's going to look for an environment variable that specifies what model to use
or defaults to open AI. I think when I have it running locally, it's defaulting to open AI,
but it looks either you, either in that environment there's a query chat client set,
or it goes down the list and then tries Anthropic. Either way, I'm happy that it works.
So, this is what you should have seen. This is just like the basic query chat app. It's just
showing us the data and the SQL query, and again, we can ask questions about the data
or have it filter and show us particular rows. You can do a lot more with query chat,
and this is just sort of the basics. Earlier, I showed you that Airbnb query chat dashboard where
it had plots, so if you want to keep going, you'd need to sort of pull the app out of,
like, instead of using this function, actually write the code for the app and then add different
elements to your UI, which we'll spend a little bit of time sort of doing in a bit.
Okay.
Okay. If you want to learn more, the query chat website is very helpful. In particular,
there's a vignette called build an app, which I think is a good starting point if you have just
your query chat app and you want to start writing a custom app, and this is linked at the bottom
here. If you use Python, there's also a query chat for Python. Okay. And again, this is built
on top of shiny chat. If you want to make just a, you know, shiny app that uses an LLM or has
an LLM chat bot in it, you can use shiny chat for that. We didn't talk about this today,
just because I didn't want to bring in, like, require shiny knowledge, but same thing with
query chat. You can make a really basic chat bot in shiny with shiny chat with pretty little code,
but then if you want to make something more complicated, you can extend it further.
So, here's the shiny chat website.
Okay. So, now we're going to spend a little bit of time talking about using coding agents for
data tasks. And the first question we really need to answer is what is an agent?
And at a high level, an agent is an LLM that can execute tools in a loop. So, you now know what a
tool is, and so you can kind of conceptualize this. It can, like, execute the tool or it can
observe the world, choose a tool, execute a tool, see the result, and act again continuously.
At an even more general level, I think an agent is just something that can gather information from
its environment, such as what files are in a directory, and it can alter its environment.
It has the power to alter the environment, like writing a data set to a file.
And you might have heard about various coding agents. I think they're, like, everywhere now.
There are a variety of them. You might have used Cloud Code or Codex, which is OpenAI's
general coding agent. You might have something, like, bespoke that your organization made for
you or something that lives in the environment where you write your code. There's a variety of
agents. Posit has a general purpose coding agent and data analysis agent called Posit Assistant,
which is what we're going to try out briefly today. But a lot of the lessons can extend to
other ones. So, if you don't have access to a particular agent, a lot of the lessons can be
extended to whatever agent you have access to. So, I think that's pretty much it.
But we're going to use Posit Assistant today, because that's what we have access to in the
environment. And so, Posit Assistant is a coding assistant. It's built right into RStudio and
Positron. And you can use it to help you write code, like R, Python, or Bash code, generally.
But you can also use it for data analysis, specifically. I'm going to show you what that
looks like in a bit. And it works with R and Python. You can also technically write Bash code.
The nice thing about Posit Assistant is that it has access to your R or Python session.
And so, this means it can see the objects in your environment. So, it actually can, like,
if you have, you know, a data frame loaded, it can actually access that. And this makes it much
more reliable, generally, for working with data and also just a more pleasant experience.
And if you at one point heard about DataBot, which is available in Positron, Posit Assistant
is essentially DataBot's successor. And if you heard about Positron Assistant, Posit Assistant
is a separate thing, despite their very similar names. The other thing I just want to add is that
Posit Assistant is relatively new, and we're still making a lot of changes every day.
Okay. I'm just going to show you a demo fast, and then you will
should be able to use it. I'll show you locally, just so that it's easy, but it should look
very similar for you. I just need to
open it locally. It's just going to take me one second.
And I will also show you how to, there's a really small amount of setup we need to do
to get you to use Posit Assistant, and I'm going to walk you through that
in a second. So, don't worry if it's not immediately clear how to use it.
Okay. Great. So, this is my local RStudio, but it should look similar for you.
It's a little bigger. And I'm in the R exercise folder.
So, Posit Assistant lives in the sidebar in RStudio, which is sort of a new feature of the IDE,
and that's why it's over here on the left-hand side.
And we can use Posit Assistant to help with general coding tasks, like I said, or data analysis. So,
first thing I'm going to do is just read in some of our data, and you can use the
at if you want to reference a particular file.
So, I'm going to read this in, ask it if I will allow it, and give me a little bit of a summary.
So, one of the things you can do is do data analysis directly in the chat if you have,
like, quick questions about the data or in the exploration process. You might eventually want
to, you know, move this over into a script or a report or something. So, I'm going to do that.
You might eventually want to, you know, move this over into a script or a report or something.
But for now, we can ask it some questions. It's going to write some code for us.
It has to install a package. While it does that, I'll point out this thinking text. So,
this is, it's using reasoning to, like, think, the model itself is using reasoning to reason
through what it wants to say before actually giving you the response. And so, you can expand
that there if you want to see its reasoning text. You can also turn that off here. Okay.
Interesting. I've never seen it cross something out before. So, yeah, it ran a bit of code. It
made some plots. We can now inspect those, ask for changes, or start to get a sense of the data.
So, it plotted total health expenditure by region. So, I think what's driving North America up is
mostly the U.S. And so, we could keep going here. You can also ask it to do sort of more general
coding questions. So, and it will behave a little bit differently. So, for example, if we asked,
like, we haven't done that much with the data, but if we said, you know, can you make a shiny app
to display the data? It's going to treat this more like just a coding task, and it's not going
to show us a lot of output. It's just going to sort of do it and then create an artifact.
At least that is what it is instructed to do. So, it's building the app and writing it to a file.
And so, I just want to say, like, there's sort of a lot that goes into Posit Assistant, but
at the core of it, a lot of the things that you learn today are also used to make something like
this. So, it has a bunch of prompting, and it has a bunch of tools. There's other stuff, too.
But those sort of basic building blocks can build up to larger things that you might make with LLMs.
And so, it's writing an app file. It's also helpful. Sorry, it opened it in another window,
but I can show you later. And you can also ask it to debug, help with any of that kind of stuff.
It's still going because the app is running. Okay. So, oh, one other thing I wanted to point
out. You'll see this little skill thing here. So, skills are like additional pieces of information
for the model. Another way to give it additional context to help it do a good job at what you're
trying to use it for. And I'm going to go back to the slides to talk about skills
a bit more because you can also write your own skills.
Great. This is the app it made, if you want to see.
It's gray because I stopped it from running.
We're going to talk about skills first.
So skills are like specialized knowledge modules,
and they automatically load when they're relevant.
So you might have noticed, like I said, I mentioned shiny,
and so it loads the shiny skill.
You don't have to manually activate them or anything.
So Positive Assistant has various built-in skills,
including the shiny BSLib one.
BSLib is a package for...
like the Shiny UI, writing Cordo, and there's other ones. But you can also make your own skills,
and this is not just for Posit Assistant. If you have like Cloud Code or Codex or anything
like that, you can write skills for those agents as well, and this is sort of a general format
that you can use across agents. The prompting might be slightly different, but it's a general
concept. But for Posit Assistant specifically, you can either make project-level skills
like for an entire project or like entire tree of directories,
if you do .posit.ai.gils or user-level skills.
Okay, I need to go backwards. Okay. So, we talked about
several ways to add context to LLMs or to agents, talked about prompting, tools,
now skills. And then the fourth way to like get agents or LLMs to do what you want is with
memory. And there's sort of a general memory format that many of these agents use,
which is an agents.md file. And this is where you can put stuff that you want to persist
across sessions with the agent. So, you might think of sort of like a system prompt,
but for the agent. And this is a markdown file, just like the prompts. This is going to store
persistent context. So, earlier we said that LLMs don't have memory, and you sort of give them a
piece of memory with an agents.md file. And this is going to be loaded at the start of every
conversation. Some things you might want to include are like the structure of your project.
If you have sort of a confusing file structure, you want it to know where certain pieces of
information are. Coding conventions, like if you have particular conventions that you or your
organization uses and you always want to use those. Preferred libraries, et cetera. Extra
information about your data, any of that. Okay. We talked about skills. I'm just looking at the
chat.
Okay, so one of the questions about how much access this model has to your data, was that
about query chat or maybe that was about positive assistant?
Positive assistant.
Yeah.
I'll just, like, for example, query chat does never seize your underlying data, like the
underlying table.
It could see the result of a query, if you're asking a question like, what's the, which
country spent the most on preventative error or something, it's going to see the results
of the query, it's not going to see the underlying data.
Positive assistant, yeah, we're going to talk about coding agents and privacy and, like,
the information flow in a little bit, so I'll just save that, but that's, yeah, Garrett's
answer is good as well.
Yeah, and it is not, the agents.md is not, there's no rag involved, yeah, it's like appended
to the system prompt of the agent itself, and it's going to be there each time you start
a conversation.
Okay.
Yeah, I believe, it's a question about, can you run query chat on the open or local models?
Yes, you can use query chat with anything that you could use with Elmer, yeah, so any
Elmer chat that you can set up, which you can for any of those models.
Great.
Okay, so we're going to try to set this up.
I'm realizing that I can't show you the setup because it's not working for me.
Is it working?
Do you have instruct working, Garrett?
Let me check that it's still running.
I can also try again.
I do have it, but you'll have to guide me through the steps.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
Do you mind sharing and I can tell you what to do?
Oh, sorry, I'll stop sharing.
All right, so here I am inside of instruct.
What should I do next?
Oh, sorry.
Okay, so you're going to click on posit assistant, yeah, right there.
And then install trust, yeah, and then I realized we weren't actually in the folder, but this
is all our content.
And I think because we're not in a project, it would look at the entire thing anyway,
and then sign in.
Open browser to authorize.
You might already be logged in, but click continue anyway.
Okay, so you are you already logged in, I'm going to send the login information for everyone
else in the chat.
Yeah.
Okay.
It says my name, but this isn't my account.
This is just how we set this up.
So when it prompts you to log in, you should be able to use that.
And again, like with the keys, this will be shut off after the workshop, but you can use
it for 25 more minutes or so.
Yeah.
Someone, if you get it to work, great, let me know.
Okay.
Does it work for anyone else?
The first step was to click on Positive Assistant in the middle-ish upper right corner.
Okay.
It seems like it's working-ish.
Yeah, thanks.
Do you mind just sharing for a little bit?
Sure.
I'm trying to figure out what will work.
Actually, I'll re-share.
Sorry.
Okay.
So once you have that set up, and yeah, feel free to message if it's not working.
You're going to use Positive Assistant to extend your query chat app.
Again, it's okay if you don't really know Shiny.
You're going to try to use Positive Assistant to get what you want from the app.
So there is a longer version of our query chat app in 08positiveassistantapp.r.
Yeah, run it first to see if it works.
And then after that, you can chat with Positive Assistant to try and just try to add a plot to the query chat app,
or whatever you want, but I would recommend adding a plot.
Okay.
Well, yes, there's a question about specifying a local model for use with Positive Assistant.
So at the moment, if you use Positive Assistant in RStudio, you have to go through the Positive AI service,
and we currently only have the Cloud models.
Like everything in the LLM world, this may change.
That is just how it is at the moment.
If you use it in Positron, you can use it with any model you have access to at this time that is either an Anthropic model,
Bedrock model, or has an OpenAI API compatible endpoint.
So you might be able to use your local model depending on the specifics there, but you can't currently do that in RStudio.
Okay.
But that's a good question.
Yeah.
Cool.
Okay.
So I have 20 minutes left.
I don't think this is going to take all the 20 minutes, so you might have some time for additional questions if you have them.
We're going to talk a little bit about privacy and security with LLMs.
So, okay.
Yeah, and people always have a lot of questions about this.
I think it's especially important if you're working with protected data, like I imagine a lot of you are.
And so, first, we talked about this a little bit, but there's another sort of distinction between model providers and LLMs that I want to draw out.
So, again, the provider is the company that hosts the model.
The LLM is the actual model that generates responses to your queries.
So, like we keep saying, LLMs are stateless.
They have no memory of your prior requests.
And this means that the LLM itself, the actual model, is not remembering anything.
If you send it your data, it does not remember your data.
It doesn't remember your requests.
It doesn't have, like, a memory portion of the model that is storing this.
At least the core LLM technology does not have this.
The tricky part is that the model provider itself might store your requests or might log them and then store them.
And so, the takeaway is that the model, even if the model doesn't remember you, the model provider's servers might.
And so, this is where, yeah, data privacy, issues with protected data, all of that can come in.
So, I'm going to walk through a flow of where the data goes.
You have a conversation.
So, again, we see this is sort of what you would see if you're just a user.
You send a question.
You ask how LMRChat works to the model provider.
Like, you're sending it to Anthropic.
You don't know what happens there.
You send it to Anthropic.
Anthropic sends you a response back.
But on Anthropic's side or the model provider's side, it's taking that.
It took your request.
It sent it to its model.
It's routing it to the actual LLM.
And, again, it's stateless.
No data is stored there.
LLM gives a model provider response.
The model provider sends it back to you.
The nuance is that, again, the model provider might store your data.
So, it could store your data and use it for future model training.
It could maybe share it with third parties.
And it might just store it to have it.
And this can vary by provider and by your agreement with your provider.
Okay.
And so, this, again, changes a little bit when you are using something like a
coding agent because there's more inputs that can go into it.
Like I said, like Posit Assistant can see your R and Python session.
It can also see your console.
It can see your files.
So, all this is going into Posit Assistant.
And so, then the question is, like, what happens?
Does that mean, like, you know, Anthropic knows all my files or something
like that?
Or does Posit know all my files?
So, the flow of information is the same.
Again, the LLM doesn't store your data.
The model provider might.
With Posit Assistant, specifically, if you're using the Posit AI service
in an Anthropic model, we have a ZDR, a zero data retention agreement
with them, which means they're never going to store.
They don't store your data.
And the only reason that Posit would store your data is if you're using
Posit AI, like you bought Posit AI service and you opted in.
If those things aren't true, your data would not be stored.
And we're talking, I'm talking specifically about Posit Assistant here,
but there might be something similar with whatever coding agent you have
and whatever model provider you might have.
But I think the main takeaway is that the LLM doesn't store your data,
but the model provider might, and you should know what your model provider
is doing with your data.
And so, because of that, you, or more likely your organization,
needs to trust your model provider, and that trust might be formed
by a formal agreement that you have with the model provider.
Because you need to know, or your organization at least,
needs to know what your model provider does with your data.
And just to clarify, like Elmer, QueryChat, ShinyChat,
any of those packages, they will never store your data anywhere.
They just pass the request onto the model provider.
And, again, Posit Assistant would only store your data if Posit's
your model provider and you've opted in.
Okay, so I feel like this sounds bad, or like, you know,
how can you develop this trust relationship?
The good news is that this is actually relatively easy
for organizations to do.
ZDRs or HIPAA-compliant agreements or other arrangements,
depending on the level of protection you need for your data,
are pretty common with model providers now.
And this would be something that your organization,
like your compliance team or something, would probably work out
with the model provider, like not you as an individual.
And then they would tell you what agreement you have in place,
what data you can use with the models, all of that.
Here's a blog post if you want to learn more about that.
So now we're going to wrap up.
I can answer more questions about that if you have it.
But here's a series of Posit packages for working with LLMs.
We mostly talked about Elmer today.
That's sort of the core LLM API package in R that many of these build on,
but there are others for different use cases.
We mentioned Vitals, which is for evaluations.
Ragnars for doing RAG from R.
Chatless is basically Elmer and Python, and there are many others.
Okay.
Yeah, so thank you.
That was all the material I had.
I'm happy to answer questions for the last 10 minutes.
Thank you especially for bearing with us through some of the technical difficulties.
I appreciate your patience, and I'm glad we got something working.
Thank you, Garrett, for getting everything working.
Okay.
Just a couple questions.
Thank you so much.
That was really a very great workshop.
Thanks.
Garrett, there's a question about when your workshop is.
I believe it will be the afternoon of June 11th.
Yeah.
We will be advertising that later this week at the conference some more,
but it will be on June 11th,
and the time will be 12 p.m. to 3 p.m. Eastern time, Eastern U.S. time,
so whatever your time zone is.
But we will be advertising that throughout the conference
so that you'll be able to write it down.
And I think that will be a great follow-up to what everyone learned today,
so I hope folks can make it.
This one was more about assembling your own AI tools by programming with Elmer.
That one will be about using the AI as it is to do data science work.
That's the compliment there.
There's a question about if Posit Assistant has access to objects between
sessions or is the session memory cleared every time?
Yeah, it only has access to the active session.
So if you restart your session,
it's not going to have a memory of an object that existed before
or be able to access that object.
Sort of similar to how, like, you're running code in the console.
If you restart your R session, those objects from before are gone.
It only has access to what exists.
Okay. Does it have an easy way to store the code that it has created?
Yes. I meant to show this.
I'll put this in the chat.
But Posit Assistant also has slash commands.
So one of these is report.
And this will make a quarter report or a Jupyter notebook from your analysis.
So if you want to move what you've done in the chat into a report,
you can use that.
You can also just ask it, like, if you wanted to put in a script,
you could ask it to write something to a script.
Yeah, in general, like, the chat is very ephemeral.
Like, you can see your past conversations.
But if you want, you know, code to share, reproduce,
you probably want to move it into some kind of artifact, definitely.
Great. Any other questions?
Oh, I see. Is Posit Assistant optimized to write good R code?
Yes. There is a lot of prompting about writing good R code or, like,
R code according to our preferences, I guess,
or what we think is useful for data tasks.
And then also it has various skills that it can load if they're relevant
to the task that helps it write even better R or Python code.
Is what true for Positron Assistant?
Oh, the optimized for R code programming?
Yes. I think they have prompting for R.
Yeah. I don't ‑‑ I work on Posit Assistant.
Positron Assistant is a different team.
But I think they have custom prompting for writing R, definitely.
I'm just trying to understand the difference between these two in terms of what
the abilities are.
Yeah. It's confusing, especially if you've been using Positron.
Posit Assistant is a successor to Data Bot, which was like a data
exploratory data analysis agent in Positron.
Right.
Whereas Positron Assistant was, like, just for coding.
And I think, like, as an organization,
we sort of moved behind the Data Bot approach instead of the Positron
Assistant approach.
Positron Assistant is essentially built on top of Copilot.
And so it sort of had to use the structure and philosophy of that.
And so a lot of the differences are, like, in how it is built and how it
behaves.
Posit Assistant is more agentic or, like, it does more things on its own.
With your input than Positron Assistant, generally.
And then there's some, like, under-the-hood design things.
And the UI is different.
Sorry, I keep asking these questions.
Which skills MD files?
So you mentioned that the tools that you just got done showing,
there's skills files for them.
I teach.
And so I'm curious to see what you've worked into the skills,
to see how that compares to the skills files I'm building for cloud code
for my students.
Yeah.
So Posit Assistant itself isn't open source.
So I can't directly share the skills with you.
But we do have a collection of open source skills here that you can,
like, add to any of your coding agent.
Or you can just look at them if you want.
But you can also add them to any coding agent you want.
And there's instructions on how to do that in the readme.
That's super valuable.
Some of them are the same, or similar at least.
Yeah.
That's super valuable.
Thank you.
Mm-hmm.
Cool.
I don't feel like I know enough about containerized environments to know the
answer to that question.
Do you know anything more, Garrett?
You point me to the question?
Yeah.
I'll just repaste it.
Okay.
I can chime in.
It was me that was posting it.
I was just wondering, like, regarding, like, performance or.
I know that we were talking about that these kind of live like within your computer,
but was curious like if you start plopping them into like, you know, duplicative or,
you know, multiplicative environments where you start trying to reproduce it across like a larger
scale, would the container affect performance or how it functions entirely?
I don't believe it would, but neither sir and I are really like an IT sysadmin sort of person.
No worries. It was just sometimes like some of the researchers here at our school,
they tend to have a lot of fun with containers and I say fun in a sarcastic way. But I was just
curious if I if anyone has any experience or has seen anything in that way. So no worries. Thank
you so much. Jared, I do know some of our customers also like to like to have fun with
containers and they still use these tools. So I anticipate a good experience. Sounds good.
Thank you, Garrett. Yeah, that's a good question. Okay.
Great. I think that was all the questions. Yeah, I don't see anything else in there. So
unless there's something else, I think we can wrap up. Okay. Thanks. You probably have to go
let your cortisol levels drop from all the technical issues you dealt with very gracefully
today. So thank you for persisting through all of the issues that come with these live
demos plus AI plus third party vendors that are out of your control. This was really great.
Yeah. Yeah. Thanks. Thank you very much. Thanks for setting up the presenters worst nightmare.
It was okay. That was a one workshop years ago and there was no Wi-Fi.
That's worse. Yes. Well, okay. I'm glad we're not your worst then. And yeah, I mean, personally,
I had a great user experience. I learned a lot and was able to end up executing everything. So
cool. Great. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you all for making it work. Yeah. I put my email somewhere. Feel free
to reach out with any more questions. I'm happy to talk more. Great. Great. Thank you. And to
everyone else. We'll see you back at 11 Eastern tomorrow morning for the start of first day of
regular talks. Thanks. Yeah. Thanks. Bye.